docs: decision to standardize django/djangojs po files FC-0012 (#32994)
openedx/edx-platform: docs/decisions/0018-standarize-django-po-files.rst

            - underscore-studio.po

A corresponding ``Makefile`` change is needed:

.. code:: make

    extract_translations: ## extract localizable strings from sources
        i18n_tool extract -v
        if [ -z "$$OPENEDX_COMBINE_FILES" ]; then \
            i18n_tool generate --config=config.extract-oep58.yaml --verbose 1;
        fi

The other file would be ran after ``make pull_translations`` which will
be used to make the final ``django.po`` and ``djangojs.po`` files that are
usable by Django:

.. code:: yaml

    # config.pull-oep58.yaml
    # This file is used by the ``make pull_translations`` when
    # the OPENEDX_ATLAS_PULL environment variable is enabled.
    generate_merge:
        django.po:
            - platform.po
            - studio.po
        djangojs.po:
            - platform-js.po
            - studio-js.po

    pull_translations: ## extract localizable strings from sources
        if [ -z "$$OPENEDX_ATLAS_PULL" ]; then \
            atlas pull translations/edx-platform/conf/locale
            i18n_tool --config=config.pull-oep58.yaml generate --verbose 1;
        fi

This option adds more complexity, but retain the Translator-friendly resource

> split.

Reviewer: After reading this discussion, I think this rejected alternative section could also have an explanation for why it was rejected (still too much complexity, wanting to simplify as much as possible, etc).

Author: Thanks @dianakhuang. I'll expand this paragraph.

Author: Done @dianakhuang, would you mind taking another look?

Standardize ``django.po`` and ``djangojs.po`` files
===================================================

Status
------

Accepted

Context
-------

> #. The edx-platform splits its translations files to ``mako-studio.po``,
>    ``django-partial.po`` among 11 files in total to make it possible for
>    translators to focus on learner-facing text
>    and de-prioritize educator-facing text. The idea was that LMS would be
>    translated into more languages than CMS (Studio) would.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```suggestion
#. The edx-platform splits its translations into ``mako-studio.po``,
   ``django-partial.po``, and 9 other files.  This was done with the
   intention of supporting more languages in the LMS than in
   the CMS (Studio).
```

Author: ```suggestion
#. The edx-platform splits its translations into ``mako-studio.po``,
   ``django-partial.po``, and 9 other files.  This was done with the
   intention of supporting more languages in the LMS than in
   the CMS (Studio).
```

#. The edx-platform uses the ``i18n_tools segment`` to split the ``django.po``
   and ``djangojs.po`` files into smaller files. This is done with the goal of
   making it easier for translators to translate the files.

#. When pulling from Transifex or cutting a new release, the translations are
   bundled into 2 files (``django.po`` and ``djangojs.po``).

> #. The `FC-0012 project <https://openedx.atlassian.net/l/cp/XGS0iCcQ>`_
>    which implements `Translation Infrastructure update OEP-58 <https://open-edx-proposals.readthedocs.io/en/latest/architectural-decisions/oep-0058-arch-translations-management.html#specification>`_
>    is in progress which means that all translation files are going to live in
>    the new `openedx-translations Transifex project`_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#. The `FC-0012 project <https://openedx.atlassian.net/l/cp/XGS0iCcQ>`_
   which implements `Translation Infrastructure update OEP-58 <https://open-edx-proposals.readthedocs.io/en/latest/architectural-decisions/oep-0058-arch-translations-management.html#specification>`_
   is in progress. Upon completion, all translation files will live in
   the new `openedx-translations Transifex project`_.
```

#. The `openedx-translations GitHub repository`_

>    is going to sync the translations between repos and Transifex as well as

Reviewer 2: > is going to sync the translations between repos and Transifex

It's not fully clear what's meant by this. It seems to imply that translations would still live in the repos. It might be good to explain the path a little:
repo source strings -> openedx-translations repo source strings -> transifex
transifex translated strings -> openedx-translations repo (pulled into repos as needed via atlas)

Author: re-worded in a more succinct way.

#. Several special steps are needed to for the `extract-translation-source-files.yml`_
   GitHub workflow in the `openedx-translations GitHub repository`_
   to extract the files from the edx-platform repo.
   This seems redundant and and it should be possible to simplify the process.

Decision: Only use two files for edx-platform translations (``django.po`` and ``djangojs.po``)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

edX Platform will push only two files (``django.po`` and
``djangojs.``) to the `openedx-translations Transifex project`_.

Consequences
------------

Pros:

- Translators will need to locate only two resources for the ``edx-platform``
  repo as opposed to 11 resources.
- Simplify the ``edx-platform`` translation extraction scripts in the
  `extract-translation-source-files.yml`_ GitHub workflow.
- The release cut process will be simplified as well by removing the
  translation merger step altogether.
- Translators will need one workflow for both latest (master) and named
  releases for the ``edx-platform`` repo.

> - In this decision we argue that the cost of splitting the resources outweighs
>   the benefits and propose to reduce the number of Transifex resources in the
>   ``openedx-translations`` Transifex project, which simplifies the work of both
>   Build Test Release and Transifex working groups.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if this fits in this section. It feels more like a summary than a listed "Pro". That being said, we could probably just shorten it to

```suggestion
- Simplifies the work of both the Build Test Release and Transifex working groups.
```

Cons:

> - Translators won't be able to focus on learner-facing text and de-prioritize
>   educator-facing text at the same time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- It will be harder for translators to focus on learner-facing text and de-prioritize
  educator-facing text.
```

Rejected Alternatives
---------------------

Combine into four files
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> This options tries to keep the original idea of splitting to allow translators

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This option tries to keep the original idea of splitting to allow translators
```

to focus on learner-facing text and de-prioritize educator-facing text.

The four files will be ``platform.po``, ``platform-js.po``, ``studio.po``
and ``studio-js.po``.

> On the other hand it will not concern the translators with the technical split

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It will not concern the translators with the technical split
```

of the files into: ``wiki.po``, ``mako.po``, and ``django-partial.po``, etc.

> Instead, the files will be split into ``platform.po``, ``platform-js.po``,
> ``studio.po`` and ``studio-js.po``. This will make it easier for translators
> and will add less resources to the openedx-translations Transifex project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

This part feels redundant

            - underscore-studio.po

A corresponding ``Makefile`` change is needed:

.. code:: make

    extract_translations: ## extract localizable strings from sources
        i18n_tool extract -v
        if [ -z "$$OPENEDX_COMBINE_FILES" ]; then \
            i18n_tool generate --config=config.extract-oep58.yaml --verbose 1;
        fi

The other file would be ran after ``make pull_translations`` which will
be used to make the final ``django.po`` and ``djangojs.po`` files that are
usable by Django:

.. code:: yaml

    # config.pull-oep58.yaml
    # This file is used by the ``make pull_translations`` when
    # the OPENEDX_ATLAS_PULL environment variable is enabled.
    generate_merge:
        django.po:
            - platform.po
            - studio.po
        djangojs.po
            - platform-js.po
            - studio-js.po

    pull_translations: ## extract localizable strings from sources
        if [ -z "$$OPENEDX_ATLAS_PULL" ]; then \
            atlas pull translations/edx-platform/conf/locale
            i18n_tool --config=config.pull-oep58.yaml generate --verbose 1;
        fi

Option 2 adds more complexity, but retain the previous Translator-friendly

> features.

Reviewer 2: Last little thing I missed. We no longer have a concept of "Option 2" in this doc.

Author: Done!

Standardize ``django.po`` and ``djangojs.po`` files
===================================================

Status
------

Accepted

Context
-------

#. The edx-platform splits its translations files to ``mako-studio.po``,
   ``django-partial.po`` among 11 files in total to make it possible for
   translators to focus on learner-facing text
   and de-prioritize educator-facing text. The idea was that LMS would be
   translated into more languages than CMS (Studio) would.

#. The edx-platform uses the ``i18n_tools segment`` to split the ``django.po``
   and ``djangojs.po`` files into smaller files. This is done with the goal to

>    make it easier for translators to translate the files.

Reviewer 2: grammar nit

```suggestion
   and ``djangojs.po`` files into smaller files. This is done with the goal of
   making it easier for translators to translate the files.
```

#. When pulling the files from Transifex, the files are bundled again into

>    ``django.po`` and ``djangojs.po`` files.

Reviewer 2: "the files" is repeated a few times in here and it's not quite clear what is being referred to.

```suggestion
#. When pulling from Transifex, the translations are bundled into 2
   files (``django.po`` and ``djangojs.po``).
```

Author: ```suggestion
#. When pulling from Transifex or cutting a new release, the translations are 
   bundled into 2 files (``django.po`` and ``djangojs.po``).
```

#. When cutting a new Open edX named-release, the files are bundled as well

>    into ``django.po`` and ``djangojs.po`` files.

Reviewer 2: might be able to just combine this with the one above it, so we'd have "When pulling from transifex or curring a new Open edX named release..."

#. The `FC-0012 project <https://openedx.atlassian.net/l/cp/XGS0iCcQ>`_

>    which implement `Translation Infrastructure update OEP-58 <https://open-edx-proposals.readthedocs.io/en/latest/architectural-decisions/oep-0058-arch-translations-management.html#specification>`_

Reviewer 2: grammar nit 

```suggestion
   which implements `Translation Infrastructure update OEP-58 <https://open-edx-proposals.readthedocs.io/en/latest/architectural-decisions/oep-0058-arch-translations-management.html#specification>`_
```

   is in progress which means that all translation files are going to live in
   the new
   `openedx-translations Transifex project <https://app.transifex.com/open-edx/openedx-translations/>`_.

> #. The `openedx-translation GitHub repository <https://github.com/openedx/openedx-translations>`_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#. The `openedx-translations GitHub repository <https://github.com/openedx/openedx-translations>`_
```

>    is going to sync the translation between repos and Transifex as well as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   is going to sync the translations between repos and Transifex as well as
```

>    store the translations files in centralized location as accepted in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   store the translation files in centralized location as accepted in
```

   `Translation Infrastructure update OEP-58 <https://open-edx-proposals.readthedocs.io/en/latest/architectural-decisions/oep-0058-arch-translations-management.html#specification>`_.

> #. Several special steps are needed to for the ``extract-translation-source-files.yml``

Reviewer 2: It would probably be good to provide some context as to what `extract-translation-source-files.yml` is. It's not clear when reading this that it's a GitHub actions workflow in the openedx-translations repo.

   to extract the files from the edx-platform repo. This seems redundant and and

>    it should be possible to simplify the process.

Author: ```suggestion
#. Several special steps are needed to for the `extract-translation-source-files.yml`_
   GitHub workflow to extract the files from the edx-platform repo.
   This seems redundant and and it should be possible to simplify the process.
```

> Decision: Combine in two files (``django.po`` and ``djangojs.po``)

Reviewer 2: I'm trying to think of a way to word this that makes it work as a standalone sentence. It's not currently clear what is being combined, or what combining means in this context.

Maybe just

```suggestion
Decision: Only use two files for edx-platform translations (``django.po`` and ``djangojs.po``)
```

------------------------------------------------------------------

This implementation is one of many "special" ways that the platform handles
i18n among other fields that makes it hard to understand the platform for

> new-comers.

Reviewer 2: this feels more like context than decision, and i'm not sure if it's needed

In this decision we argue that the cost outweighs the benefits and propose
to reduce the number of Transifex resources in the
``openedx-translations`` Transifex project, which simplifies the work of both

> Build Test Release and Transifex working groups.

Reviewer 2: this feels more like consequence than decision. It's also not explained how or why this will simplify BTR and translations WG work.

> With the new approach edX Platform will push only two files: ``django.po`` and
> ``djangojs.`` to Transifex (via the ``openedx-translations`` project)
> instead of the current set of files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
edX Platform will push only two files (``django.po`` and
``djangojs.``) to the ``openedx-translations`` Transifex project.
```

Both options helps to make the automation of ``extract-translation-source-files.yml``
easier by making the edx-platform repo less of a snowflake. We hope that

> future Open edX contributors will thank us for this :)

Reviewer 2: it's not clear what "both options" is referring to here. this also feels like it would be a part of consequences

Author: I've removed this section and expanded the `consequences` section with clear pros and cons.

Consequences
------------

This will mean that the translators will have to translate both learner-facing

> and educator-facing text at the same time to achieve 100% translation.

Reviewer 2: It's not clear from the text what "100% translation" means. I assume this is referring to the state of the resource on transifex, but it'd be good to clarify that here.

Future Alternative
------------------

We could consider segmenting the entries by tags instead of files.

While it would be less discoverable for translators, it would be achieve
the both goals at the same time.

Implementing this idea is out of scope for this decision and its follow-up

> work.

Reviewer 2: it's not clear what's being suggested here, and I'm not sure if it's relevant to this document.

Author: I've removed this section. I has a good idea but I'd rather having a less confusing document.

Timeline
--------

This will be implemented in the first named release in which OEP-58 is
implemented. The changes will be made behind environment variable feature

> flags to ensure a smooth transition while the new implementation is tested.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure we need this in here.

Author: Removed.

Suggested Option 1 Implementation
---------------------------------

The Makefile will be changed to include a new environment variable
``OPENEDX_COMBINE_FILES``. When this variable is set, all Python po files will
be combined into ``django.po`` while JavaScript entries will be combined into

> ``djangojs.po``.

Reviewer 2: this could probably be moved up to the consequences section

Author: Removed. it's an implementation detail that may vary in the future.

.. code:: make

    extract_translations: ## extract localizable strings from sources
        i18n_tool extract -v
        if [ -z "$$OPENEDX_COMBINE_FILES" ]; then \
            i18n_tool generate --verbose 1;

>         fi

Reviewer 2: i don't think we need this level of implementation detail in here

Author: Removed. it's an implementation detail that may vary in the future.

Removal of ``i18n_tool``
------------------------

It seems to be that the ``i18n_tool`` still has uses to extract from
third-party apps such as the ``wiki`` and ``edx_proctoring_proctortrack``

> which this decision does not address, so it will not be removed.

Reviewer 2: this feels like a combination of context and rejected alternative. It also feels only tangentially related to the decision being made. I think we can just remove this section.

> which this decision does not address, so it will not be removed.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Rejected Alternatives
---------------------

> Option 2: Combine into four files

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Combine into four files
```
